202401161506
Meta Tags: #class
Tags: [[computer science]] [[CSE 310]]

# 1_16_2024

## Big-O Recap

Any positive constants $c$ and $n_0$ such that
$$0 \le f(n) \le c \cdot g(n)$$
for $n \ge n_0$.

### Pull-up proof

- Find the fastest growing term in f(n) when expanded
- Pull up the rest to have the same term times a constant so they can all be added.

### Popular Big-O Notations

- O(1) - constant
- O(log n), O(log2n) - equivalent because of the base change formula: $\log_{2} n = \frac{\log_{a} n}{\log_{a} 2}$, the denominator is a constant
- O(n) - linear
- O(n log n)

## Big-$\Omega$ Notation

Any positive constant $c$ and $n_0$ such that:
$$c \cdot g(n) \le f(n) \le 0$$
for $n \ge n_0$.

Like a "greater than" term for time complexity.

### Pull-down proof

- Get rid of any terms in f(n) that are obviously less than g(n)
- multiply g(n) until both are equal

## Big-$\Theta$ Notation

$f(n) \ \mathcal{O}(g(n))$ and $f(n) \ \Omega(g(n))$ at the same time.

>[!important]
>Keep in mind that $g(n)$ has to be the same function for both Big-O and Big-$\Omega$.

>[!note] Rule of Thumb for Polynomial Complexity
>Only consider the leading term of the formula (drop lower-order terms).

## What if we are comparing the order of growth between two functions of complexity❔

Use **l'Hopital's** to solve a division.

| Time Complexity Notation | Comparison Symbol | Limit |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| $f \in O(g)$ | $f \le g$ | $\lim_{x \rightarrow \infty} \frac{f(x)}{g(x)} < \infty$ |
| $f \in \Theta(g)$ | $f = g$ | $\lim_{x \rightarrow \infty} \frac{f(x)}{g(x)} \in \mathcal{R^+}$ |
| $f \in \Omega(g)$ | $f \ge g$ | $\lim_{x \rightarrow \infty} \frac{f(x)}{g(x)} > 0$ |


## Are all algorithms tightly bounded? AKA do all algorithms have a time complexity expressible in Big-Theta?

No.

## Practice 1

Show $f(n) = \ln n$ and $g(n) = \log_{2} n$ are in the same order of growth.

$$\ln n = \frac{\log_{2} n}{\log_{2} e}$$
$2^n$ vs. $3^n$

## Extra Credit 1

Is $$n^{1/2} \ O(\log_{2} n)$$$$\lim_{x \rightarrow \infty} \frac{\sqrt{n}}{\log_{2} n}$$
$$\lim_{x \rightarrow \infty} \frac{n \ln 2 }{2 \sqrt{n}}$$
$$\lim_{x \rightarrow \infty} \sqrt{n} \frac{\ln 2}{2} = \infty$$
Which means that it is false, as log_2 n will never catch up to n^1/2 as n goes to infinity.















---
# *References*